# Understanding the Hearthstone economy

## Introduction

The motivating question concerning this project was how generous (or not) is the Hearthstone economy. How many packs would it take to complete a collection? How many packs would it take to build every viable deck in the meta? How many packs would it take to build that deck you want? How long would it take to do all of these things (given the rate of gold accumulation)? Has the Hearthstone economy been getting less or more generous over time?

This document is meant to be a high-level overview of how the simulation works as it is the simulation of opening packs and generating gold which produces all the estimates I base my analysis on. This is meant as much as a reference for future me as it is for other people who may attempt to use this. I strive to properly document all my code as well as properly testing it and following best programming practices. Nevertheless it is easy to lose the big picture of the program which is what I'll be documenting here.

## The execution flow

* **RunSimulation**: This function initiates the running of the simulation. Importantly you would specify here using the **nrRuns** argument how many times you want the simulation to run. The simulation being a pack-opening simulation. We capture how many packs it would take to complete the *targeted* collection. By default the targeted collection is every card in the set, and by default the simulation will capture how many packs it takes to complete every set ever released in Hearthstone.
  * **PacksToCompletion**: This function is in charge of opening packs until the set is complete. The first function call is made to the function factory **CreateCollection**.
    * **CreateCollection**: This is a function factory (a function which returns another function). When called, it initializes an empty collection of the specified set. It will return a function which can be used to add cards to the collection.
    * Once the function is created for adding cards to our collection, we can start opening packs.
    * **OpenPack**: As the name suggests, this function opens a pack. Packs, at this point, are 5 random draws from the set of common, rare, epic, legendary, golden common, golden rare, golden epic, and golden legendary. The distribution of these rarities is estimated using data from pitytracker.com. Any individual pack or streak of pack openings may not be realistic (e.g. you may got a pack of all commons, you may go more than 40 packs without opening a legendary), but I anticipate my pack openings, on average and given large enough numbers, will be equivalent to what would happen if you were to open real Hearthstone packs.
    * I also incorporate the more generous pity timer when opening packs from a new set (guaranteed legendary in the first 10 packs which is different from the usual 40). I don't have any data concerning the distribution of rarities in people's first 10 pack openings so I tried to be as judicious as possible when designing this section. There's also the issue of the fact that the pitytracker.com data is already incorporating into its estimated distribution of rarities the fact that people draw legendaries at a higher rate in their first 10 packs. Nevertheless I still think it's useful for estimating the *relative* difference in the number of packs which need to be opened if you have the more generous pity timer vs. not having it.
    * The flow of this function is as follows:
        1. Given the more generous pity timer, sample from the set of no legend, legendary, and golden legendary. By default, the more generous pity timer is turned off. In the **PacksToCompletion** function, a pity timer is provided which increases by 0.1 for each pack that is opened without opening a legendary or golden legendary. By the time the 10th pack is being opened, P(Picking a legendary or golden legendary) = 1. Once a legendary is picked, the pity timer is turned off.
        2. Given that a legend wasn't picked (no legend, this will be the default case), open a pack like normal (5 draws).
        3. If a legend or golden legendary was picked, pick 4 cards from the a modified set of common, rare, epic, golden common, golden rare, and golden epic. The probabilities for picking legendaries and golden legendaries are redistributed evenly across the remaining rarities.
        4. Once the rarity of all 5 cards has been set, we call the function created by **CreateCollection** (generally I call it **AddCardFunc**) 5 times (once for each card in the pack). To be concrete about this, the cards in the pack at this point are just rarities.
        * **AddCardFunc**: This function adds a card to your collection. The flow is as follows:
            1. Given the set and the rarity, determine the sample space of cards from which we'll be randomly picking.
            2. If duplicate protection is on for cards of all rarities, remove from the sample space all cards in the collection of the current rarity which we already have full copies of. If we have full copies of every card, then randomly sample from all possible cards of the current rarity.
            3. If duplicate protection is on for legendaries AND the current draw is a legendary, remove from the sample space all cards in the collection which are legendary, and which we already have full copies of. If we have full copies of every legendary card, then randomly sample for all possible legendary cards.

